I don't know, sophomore year, I guess things began to, in hindsight, began to blend together because the sophomore, junior, senior year seemed like a kind of a continuum of experience where the freshman year was unique and that you were proving yourself and you were being tested and evaluated.
Sophomore, junior, senior year, I felt like
more in control, more confident, and more of just an active participant in all that was going on.
Various things, if I see a picture or something will stand out.
One of my friends wrote me a couple of months ago, he remembers going over and winning the drill competition.
on Simpson Field.
And I have just the briefest recollection, but he remembers it like that's one of the big events of his time at A&M.
And I presume that academically your outfit had a wide variety of majors.
Yeah, we did.
And the Commandant of the Corps at that time was whom?
Well I know, I think when we started Joe Davis, Colonel Joe Davis was, and then either my junior year or senior year it became Colonel Denzel L. Baker.
And I don't remember exactly which year it changed over.
The only time that I was ever in the Commandant's Office was in my junior year after the incident over there when I went from Cadet First Sergeant to Cadet Private, and that was the only time I was ever in the Commandant's Office until I came back to be Commandant, and I don't remember who it was that demoted me.
I don't remember my feelings other than the time that I was fortunate to be in the Corps
and that I had allowed something that was potentially disastrous to go on and really, I hope I'm not overdrawn it, but I do recall thinking, learning the lesson about responsibility when you're in charge of people.
Jim Hannigan was the dean of students.
Did you all see much of him?
Only from a distance.
He was the one that signed off on your disciplinary action.
I remember him as always having a pleasant, if not smiling, happy manner about him, but only frequently at a large social activity would I see him.
And this man, Earl Rutter, did you all see much of him?
What was your impression of him?
Well, tremendous amount of respect for President Rutter.
I remember at some point early in my freshman year of him talking to a group of us at the YMCA about the importance of doing well as students and being good Aggies.
And I do remember periodic times in Guyon Hall,
perhaps other places where he would address the Corps, and he was always very much to the point, very direct, very, very confident person.
It was like
this is what you will do, this is what you will be, and there was no even hint or question that that was going to be any different than what he said.
Yell practices, football games, whenever he was on
on public display, he was always impressive.
And I remember feeling very good that he was the president of our university, that he was the guy.
Were you all aware of his World War II experiences?
Yes, although the actual
The extent of it became more apparent to me as I went along in my career when I had occasion to study military history and then coming back as a commandant to
get to know Mrs. Rudder on a personal basis, and the movie Private Ryan, which featured the 2nd Ranger Battalion which he commanded stimulated my interest, and then Mrs. Rudder has had a time or two where she's had members of the unit
over to the house for social activities and being able to talk to his radio man when he was going up the cliffs at Pointe du Huc.
Those are first-hand experiences.
I asked the radio operator, what was it like?
Did you go up first or was it Colonel Rudder up this rope first?
He said, well, he always led the way.
And I said, well, were you getting shot at or were you down below?
And he said, you bet we were getting shot at.
I said, well, did you have a pistol out?
He said, no.
He said, I had to use both hands to climb, he said, but Colonel Rudder definitely had his pistol out.
And I said, was he shooting at targets or was it just to have suppressing fire going up?
And he said, well, he said, I think it was suppressing fire.
He said, we had so much adrenaline
He said, read that, that we were so scared that rather than be passive, you wanted to be active.
I could identify with that because one of the things I learned in combat is you always want your
When you're under fire you want to be returning fire even if you're not sure, exactly sure where the enemy may be.
Twenty years ago when I was president at UTEP and met Omar Bradley for the first time at a football game, he was in a wheelchair, body fragile but mind very sharp.
He looked up at me and he said, were you at A&M?
Yes, sir.
Did you know Earl Rudder?
His voice broke a little as he said this next sentence, in 48 years of command responsibility, I never gave a more awful order to any man than the one I gave to Earl Rudder the night before they went up the cliff.
And I had not seen Point to Hock at that point, and he said, because if they hadn't succeeded, we would have had a massacre on both beaches because of what the artillery could have done.
that point and where the Germans were, I understood what he had to say.
And it caused me to appreciate Mr. Rudder even more.
Now, did you all ever think about trying any pranks on him?
Never.
He was respected.
That's the impression I had.
You just, there was this
I don't know, sense of Aggies were in the minority, were the underdogs, were good and important, but we have something to prove and you've got to fight for everything you want and you've got to be competitive and the friends you have are your Aggie friends.
Who were some of the other key campus personalities during your student days?
Well, President Rutter, James P. Hannigan.
Of course, Pinky Downs was here, the official greeter.
I remember Pinky Downs.
I remember Mr. Mammaliga over in the Health and P.E.
Department.
He was a swimming coach and had been
great diver at Ohio State and he was very much into the training of Randy Mattson for Olympic shot put fame.
I remember Mr. Pinberthy over in health and physical education.
I remember Dr. Chuck McCandless who was an outstanding instructor.
What made him outstanding?
Well, he was real and he was very conscientious and he taught in a manner that he was sharing knowledge with
with the students so that they would be better prepared for challenges.
It wasn't like he was just giving you information that you had to regurgitate on a test.
He was giving you information that would be helpful to you as you went through your life and the sharing views that he had found to be true in his life and in his experiences.
helping you to be prepared to do whatever you wanted to do.
Wayne Stark, did you have any?
No, I unfortunately didn't.
I was not into the, my activities were
were core oriented and I was happy where I was.
Describe the student, the A&M student body at A&M in those years, describe it in general.
Their attitudes, their values, where did they come from, their economic level.
What kind of people were here?
Well, today's vernacular would only be as describing as conservative.
I think there was also a very strong influence of small town Texas.
There was also the influence of farm ranch background.
There was a number of students here from the big cities, i.e., Houston, Dallas, Fort Worth, San Antonio, but even the people that came from those cities seemed to
take on the flavor, if you will, of conservative, I make it with my hands and my back, I'm strong physically, I'm fit physically, I know how to operate in a man's world, I know how to get along with people.
You know, there's not a whole lot of gray areas.
You're right or you're wrong, and it's left or it's right, it's not in the middle, etc.
A lot of confident people, a lot of maybe somewhat
sheltered in their beliefs, some of the beliefs not necessarily worldly in nature, but steadfastly held and high morals, high ethics, patriotism, feeling of pride in being a Texan.
Was there any difficulty for a young man from North Dakota here?
I really don't remember.
There might have been some, what's the Yankee doing here type of thing, but I, once again, I never felt bullied, threatened, spat upon.
You know, I never felt belittled.
I'm sure there must have been, but I was such a positive experience.
That's one reason I was so happy and eager to come back to A&M when I retired from the Marine Corps.
What about Hispanics, Jews, Catholics?
I just don't remember any ill feeling or ill actions towards anybody.
Why wasn't there?
I don't know.
To me, I always speak for myself, the core experience was that, hey, the only way you really account for something is when you're a member of a team.
I think that's the key.
Individually you're not going to do anything.
If you're going to have any success, whether it's in business or in the military, you're going to have to be
a good teammate, and you look out for your teammates.
I know now much in a different plane that diversity is the strength of a team, not just because you have
certain people that can do certain skills, you gotta have offensive linemen as well as wide receivers, but on any type of team, when you have diverse people, what it teaches you is that you have to appreciate people for their individual strengths and differences, and then the challenge is to get it to all bind together so that you have a purpose to work together.
And that sounds maybe a little bit
theoretical, and I'm not sure I reflected on that when I was learning it when I went through the Corps, but boy, what powerful lessons, lifetime lessons.
Now, I'm assuming there were some Hispanic students that you knew.
Oh, yeah, I, but, you know, I can remember Roberto Esquivel, who was in my, uh, in my outfit as a freshman, but, um, and, uh, of course my, my, uh, my, um, you know, I already mentioned, uh, Joe Rodriguez, who was our athletic.
That's it.
Hector comes two years after you as Corps Commander?
Yeah, I don't remember Hector in the Corps.
Hector Gutierrez?
Yeah, I know he was.
Let's see.
There weren't many international students, though, in that era.
And integration came after you graduated?
Yeah.
Okay.
Mr. Rudder handled that superbly.
Let's see.
Did you ever go to the quack shack?
Did you ever get sick, have to go to the...
No, I never did.
I guess, you know, I'm like so many
I guess fortunate people, I picked out the right parents.
And I've been really healthy.
I do remember somebody in an outfit got sick, and I remember going to visit them in the hospital.
The reason I went over there is because the upperclassman said, you know, you freshmen go by and see your fish buddy.
And when you get over there, you see what a world of good it means to the individual.
And you carry that modus operandi with you the rest of the time I was on active duty when one of your, in my case, one of my Marines was down.
To go see them and attempt to be uplifting as you can, that's what good leaders do.
Do you remember any campus or neighborhood of the campus religious events?
Did you participate in any?
Well, I did.
I belonged to St.
Thomas Episcopal Church, which is right on the other side of Duncan Field, and that's the church I belong to now.
Did you attend when you were?
Yeah, I sure did.
I was pretty regular.
Describe that, please, because those are hard for me to locate.
Well, I remember during freshman orientation that there was a time when you
put your hand in the air, you signed up for whatever religion you were, and then you were grouped or you met with and they took you to the church.
I remember it was the evening time and they said, you know, this is, I'm sure they said, I don't remember, this is St.
Thomas Episcopal Church, this is where we're located, I want you to come and feel free to come.
And today, it would be very, very, very politically incorrect for A&M to do that.
In the Corps, I require everybody to go to church the first two Sundays they're here.
If they don't go to church, we say, okay, we'll come by, we're going to have character instruction.
However, we recommend you go to church because they know you're coming, and the first two Sundays at Leaf, there'll be lots of food there, and also some of the parishioners have daughters.
So away they go.
And I said it's a way, and we talk all this thing about no man's an island, no person's an island, you've got to get out and meet people, et cetera, and it may be the worst experience you've ever had.
If you try ten experiences, I guarantee you that one or two is going to turn out okay, but if you don't try any, you're not going to get there.
So, duh, you will go, and this is why.
You can see, once in a while you'll see a light go on.
Sometimes you have to force people, but the response has been good.
I didn't have any great revelations or inspirations or whatever.
I've always been a churchgoer and faith has always been a big part of me, but I can't say that I don't remember the names of the minister.
Was there a Sunday night?
No, I remember the thing I used to do, the thing that was 8 o'clock was Holy Communion, and it was 40 minutes, and I could come back and change clothes and go to brunch or breakfast or whatever there was.
What typically did undergraduates do on Sunday nights then?
Well, all I can remember
is that there was a set time you had to be back, usually by 7.30, and there was normally an outfit meeting on Sunday night where the outfit leaders said, this is what's going to happen this week.
Appointed a freshman for all our sins of the previous week, and we said, yes sir, yes sir, don't ever happen again, sir.
All right, now describe a home football Saturday.
How did it begin and what all went on during that day, the home game?
Well, I remember football Friday nights in Duncan.
Oh, yes.
Let's back up.
Football Friday nights because all the girls that would come to Duncan is dates.
And if all the best behavior that we were on and the comments about whose date is particularly nice looking and that type of thing, of course that was all led up to all week by all the, as I mentioned earlier, kind of the gossip at the tables about so-and-so's girls coming down from such and such and so-and-so's girl dumped them and now she's dating somebody in another outfit, et cetera.
So all this kind of social whirl
was going around.
I remember that a lot of the girls would stay at various homes.
Being an out-of-towner, I remember having some blind dates.
Really, I honestly don't remember.
I remember I did have a girl I knew from my high school in North Dakota was going to SMU.
She came down for the SMU game.
I remember that date.
I remember Duncan on Friday night, the girls are here, aren't they attractive?
Boy, this is new and this is neat and we're on our best behavior, etc.
A midnight yell practice of standing out there without a date and having the band march down the quadrangle area and everybody getting in behind the band locking arms as they went by.
Then the band and the yell leaders
leading us around the campus until we came back to Kyle Field.
Going into Kyle Field and being in the North Horseshoe for the Yale practices, no microphones, just the Yale leaders out there.
Been going back that night
getting to bed late, but getting up early the next morning to go to chow, and it seems like, I don't know if we had drilled or not, but things were leading up to the game and then falling out to march over for the game, marching in and knowing that we were being graded, going up in the stands, usually getting outscored.
going down for the yell leaders afterwards.
It was fun to be down on Kyle Field getting the yell leaders and taking them to the fish pond.
That's all kind of blurry.
I don't ever remember specifically tackling a yell leader or specifically carrying a yell leader.
I don't remember yell practice at the fish pond, although I'm sure I was there.
Now, was it, to your outfit's credit, if you and your buddies were one of the ones that tackled a yellow eater and carried him down there?
Was that kind of a score or something?
I don't remember.
All right.
Then, for the day games, then what did you and your buddies do on Saturday night, if you didn't have a date?
I don't know, must have gone to a movie or gone out to eat or something, or gone to Guyon Hall, I don't know.
Guyon Hall was a dime.
Sit in Guyon Hall and yell things out.
I mean I was the type of, I'd probably sit there kind of gentlemanly like and sit and laugh at whatever else.
Was campus theater any quieter than Guyon?
Seems like they were both pretty rowdy, but funny.
I must have been part of that, because I thought it was funny.
And the things that were yelled were not obscene, were they?
No, they were funny.
They were like, I don't know, but they were male.
They were male humor.
I mean, this all-male school, and there was
There was lots of talk about women and sex, but it just seemed natural and funny.
There wasn't talking about girlfriends.
There wasn't talking about sisters or moms.
It was just kind of this great mystery of women out there that was talked about.
Did you ever have a blind date from TSCW?
Ah, yes.
We played T.C.
It must have been my junior year.
It was not a great experience for me and not a great experience for her.
How did you get the date?
It was a blind date.
Did you write one of those letters I've heard where you send it to the same box number up there?
I don't know.
I think it was a set-up date.
I remember going to a dance on their campus, and then as best I can recall, there was adjoining motel rooms in Fort Worth, and there was like, oh, ten or twelve guys in one room and ten or twelve girls in the other room, and it was like
I just—most of us, all I wanted to do was just go to sleep so the next—because, you know, there was lack of sleep and you wanted to get up the next day.
It was not like anywhere near an animal house or orgy time.
It was just—
And you're inferring that you did not, a lasting relationship was not true.
No.
It was just, okay.
And then the girls went back to TSU and we came back to College Station and that was it.
And what time you need to leave?
About 3.20.
Okay.
During your student years here,
What were the extremes of drink and tobacco and so forth that students did?
I remember one guy, a few people that were heavy drinkers.
I remember one guy that was in our outfit when I was a freshman that used to come in drunk on most Friday and Saturday nights, and somewhere he got a metal desk that he pushed down the stairs from the fourth floor down, and the freshman had to carry it back up.
What were they drinking?
Was it beer, whiskey, or what?
I don't know.
I was never a drinker.
I never paid much attention to it.
Was there much traffic to Whiskey Bridge that you knew about?
Seems like a lot of people talked about it.
What about smoking?
What were they smoking?
Only cigarettes, but once in a while somebody might have a cigar.
Were you and your buddies even aware of drugs?
No.
Even in the Marine Corps, my first tour in the Marine Corps overseas in 1966 was
And I came back in 1970, and it was like, oh my gosh, what's all this?
Things have changed.
Different Marine Corps.
I did not know the word heroin in that time.
No.
Illegal drugs was just, that wasn't part of it.
Yeah.
Was it even allowed for students to smoke in their room, smoke a cigarette in their corps room?
I don't know.
I imagine it was.
Let's see.
We're about to finish this side.
When you traveled, you didn't have wheels.
How did you get around?
Well, my start of my junior year I had a car.
Oh, okay.
I remember my freshman year I hitchhiked all the way home at Easter from College Station to Billings, Montana.
How long did that take?
Um, let's see, I left here at noon time, and I, so that would have been, let's see, 20, it took about 36 hours.
My goodness.
Did you ever have a negative hitchhiking experience?
Mm-hmm.
And you did it in uniform.
No, I didn't.
I, I didn't civilian clothes.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
Um, any amusing hitchhiking experience?
No, I, I met, uh,
I met Rick McPherson, who's class of 62, and I'm class of 65, and he was a senior.
He was the CO of C-1.
I knew he was in the Marine Corps program, but when he picked me up, he didn't know me from anybody.
And during our time in the Marine Corps he was always three or four years senior to me and he's retired and working at A&M and here I'm back here and he still sees me and we still, you know, remember back to that time and we met and we've become fairly good friends.
How did you communicate with your parents?
From the time I came to A&M until all the way through my Marine Corps career, I always wrote my parents a letter on Sunday evening, whether I was overseas in Vietnam or whether I was a student at Texas A&M.
I'd always get one letter a week back from each of them, big letter writers.
Are any of those letters in existence?
I have, yes.
For goodness sakes, make copies for your family?
and at some point share a copy with the A&M archives.
Nobody has a journal.
Nobody keeps a diary anymore.
And if we had, think 50 years from now, your weekly letters, if you describe what was happening and what, think how important those could be.
But, because you see, they may get thrown away.
Like one of the things many of us are very, very worried about
Mrs. Rudder is not being careful to keep Mr. Rudder's stuff together.
She gives some of it.
Occasionally a stranger will stop and talk her out of some of it.
She gave two or three Eisenhower letters away not long ago.
And her family is begging her, please, please.
And of course, the best place would be the Cushing Archives because then they're safe forever.
Let's see, did you make many phone calls?
No, phones were expensive.
Did you go with buddies home much?
Yeah, I did.
I remember going to Brownwood, going to Dallas, going to Beaumont.
Houston.
My grandparents lived in Palestine, so I could go up there and that was like, you know, you couldn't get enough sleep, the bed couldn't be fluffy enough that you couldn't eat enough food to keep them happy, you know, so it was a nice indulgence.
Let's see, let's quit there and let you.